

Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Pilani
Work Integrated Learning Programmes Division
M.Tech. Automotive Engineering/Electronics
Digital Learning Handout
Part A: Content Design
Course Title
AUTOMOTIVE SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
Course No(s)
AE ZG517 / AEL ZG517
Credit Units

Credit Model
32-0-0
 (XX Hours of Class-room Instruction + XX Hours of Case-studies/Tutorials/Laboratories + XX Hours of Student Preparation)
Instructors 
SAJEETH KUMAR
Version No:
6.2
Date:
12-Jan-2025
Course Description:

Course Objectives
No
Course Objective
CO1
Introduce hard and soft skills that are required of good automotive systems engineers
CO2
Impart the knowledge about foundations of systems engineering to gain an in-depth knowledge of system engineering principles, processes, and methods
CO3
Help engineers to learn and apply the systems engineering (SE) methodologies in modern complex automotive system development environments
CO4

CO5


Text Book(s):
T1
Systems Engineering Handbook, A guide for system life cycle processes and activities, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 4th Edition, 2015.

T2


Reference Book(s) & other resources:
R1
Systems Engineering and Analysis, by Benjamin S Blanchard, Wolter J Fabrycky, Pearson, 5th Edition, 2013
R2
Automotive Systems Engineering, Markus Maurer, Hermann Winner (eds.), Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2013
R3

Learning Outcomes: Students will be able to 
LO1
Describe processes, methods, and practices of systems engineering
LO2
Develop requirements, architectures, specifications, verifications, and tests 
LO3
Recognize important systems engineering and systems thinking strategies and practices
LO4
Apply systems engineering practices and methods in automotive systems
LO5
Analyse automotive systems using systems engineering approaches to increase performance


Part B: Learning Plan
Contact Session
List of Topic Title
Sub-Topics
Reference
1
Introduction to Systems Engineering
- Engineering failures case studies  - Importance of systems engineering in avoiding failures

2
Systems Engineering Fundamentals
- INCOSE definition  - Systems thinking  - ISO/IEC 15288 life cycle processes

3
Traditional vs Model-Based Systems Engineering
- Differences between traditional and MBSE  - MBSE tools (SysML, Simulink)

4
Requirements Engineering
- Stakeholder identification  - Needs vs requirements  - Requirements traceability

5
System Design and Architecture
- Concept of operations (CONOPS)  - High-level design  - System architecture and freeze

6
Case Study 1
- Analysis of real-world systems engineering failure or success related to requirements and design

7
Operational and Functional Analysis (Combined)
- Operational scenarios  - Capability gap analysis  - Defining system functions  - Requirements allocation

8
System Integration, Verification & Validation
- Integration process  - Verification & Validation (V&V) plans  - Testing types

9
Project and Risk Management (Combined)
- Project estimation and control  - Work breakdown structure  - Agile systems development  - Risk identification  - DFMEA

10
Decision and Quality Management (Combined)
- Decision analysis techniques  - Quality assurance  - Critical parameter management

11
Agreement and Infrastructure Management (Combined)
- Supplier engagement and contracts  - Vendor selection criteria  - Infrastructure requirements  - Life cycle management plans

12
Specialty Engineering (Safety & Security)
- Safety analysis  - Security requirements engineering  - Interoperability

13
Life Cycle Cost (LCC) & Total Cost of Ownership (TCO)
- LCC analysis methods  - Total cost of ownership analysis

14
Case Study 2
- Advanced case study analysis related to safety, security, and specialty engineering aspects

15
Technical Management & Enabling Processes
- Project planning  - Decision Management  - Enabling processes like HR management and infrastructure

16
Emerging Trends in Systems Engineering
- Emerging tools and practices  - Future of agile systems engineering  - MBSE in practice





Experiential Learning Components:
Describe objective, outcome of Experiential Learning Component and the lab infrastructure needed (virtual, remote, open source etc..) number of lab exercises needed, etc.
	•	Lab work:
	•	Project work: 
	•	Case Study:
	•	Simulation:
	•	Work Integrated Learning Assignment
	•	Design work/ Field work: 


Objective of Experiential Learning Component:

Case Study – 20%

The case studies will focus on application of systems engineering principles to an industry relevant problem in the automotive domain. Evaluation will be based on the application of systems engineering practises to solve the problem.

Scope of Experiential Learning Component:


Lab Infrastructure:


List of Experiments:

Exp No.
Case Study
Reference to handout module/section
1.
Will be delivered via elearn portal post mid semester

2.


3.


4.


5.








Evaluation Scheme: 

Legend: EC = Evaluation Component; AN = After Noon Session; FN = Fore Noon Session
Evaluation Component
Name
(Quiz, Lab, Project, Mid-term exam, End semester exam, etc.)
Type (Open book, Closed book, Online, etc.)
Weight
Duration
Day, Date, Session, Time
EC – 1*
Quiz
Online
10%
1 week


Assignment
Online
20 %
10 days

EC - 2
Mid-Semester Test
Closed Book
30%
2 hours 

EC - 3
Comprehensive Exam
Open Book
40%
2 ½ Hours


EC1* (20% - 30%): Quiz (optional): 5-10 %, Lab Assignment/Assignment: 20% - 30%
Syllabus for Mid-Semester Test (Closed Book): Topics in Contact session:  1 to 8
Syllabus for Comprehensive Exam (Open Book): All topics 

Important Links and Information:
eLearn Portal: https://elearn.bits-pilani.ac.in
Students must visit the eLearn portal regularly and stay updated with the latest announcements and deadlines.
Contact Sessions: Students should attend the online lectures as per the schedule provided on the eLearn portal.
Evaluation Guidelines:
	•	EC-1 consists of either two Assignments or three Quizzes. Students will attempt them through the course pages on the eLearn portal. Announcements will be made on the portal in a timely manner.
	•	For Closed Book tests: No books or reference material of any kind will be permitted.
	•	For Open Book exams: “open book” means text/ reference books (publisher copy only) and does not include any other learning material. No other learning material will be permitted during the open book examinations. For Detailed Guidelines refer to the attached document. 
  EC3 Guidelines 
	•	If a student is unable to appear for the Regular Test/Exam due to genuine exigencies, the student should follow the procedure to apply for the Make-Up Test/Exam, which will be made available on the eLearn portal. The Make-Up Test/Exam will be conducted only at selected exam centres on the dates to be announced later.
It shall be the responsibility of the individual student to be regular in maintaining the self-study schedule as given in the course handout, attend the online lectures, and take all the prescribed evaluation components such as Assignments/Quizzes, Mid-Semester Tests and Comprehensive Exams according to the evaluation scheme provided in the handout.

********************
